>> Woodruff: HOUSE REPUBLICANS
MADE AN OFFER TODAY TO PUSH BACK
THE DEBT-LIMIT DEADLINE, WITHOUT
ENDING THE GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
GWEN IFILL IS OFF.
ALSO AHEAD THIS THURSDAY, A
CLOSER LOOK AT THE WINNER OF
THIS YEAR'SOBEL N PRIZE FOR
LITERATURE.
ALICE MUNRO-- THE MASTER OF THE
CONTEMPORARY SHORT STORY.
AND IN BOSNIA, DISPUTES OVER A
CENSUS IN A SOCIETY STILL
SCARRED FROM A BRUTAL ETHNIC WAR
DECADES AGO.
>> LOSING NUMBERS IS PERCEIVED
AS A THREAT AND A POSSIBILITY
FOR BEING DOMINATED BY OERTH
ETHNIC GROUPS.
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE JUST SOME
OF THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S "PBS NEWSHOUR."
>> Woodruff: OUR LEAD STORY
TONIGHT, FOR THE FIRST TIME
SINCE MUCH OF THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT CLOSED TEN DAYS AGO,
THERE WAS TALK OF A WAY OUT.
HOUSE REPUBLICAN LEADERS FLOATED
A PROPOSAL TO STAVE OFF NATIONAL
DEFAULT.
DEMOCRATS PRESSED FOR A WAY TO
REOPEN THE GOVERNMENT AS WELL.
WE BEGIN WITH A REPORT FROM
"NEWSHOUR" CONGRESSIONAL
CORRESPONDENT KWAME HOLMAN.
>> Reporter: AFTER A CLOSED-DOOR
MEETING, HOUSE SPEAKER JOHN
BOEHNER HAD A NEW OFFER:
REPUBLICANS WILL OKAY A
TEMPORARY INCREASE IN THE DEBT
CEILING IF THE PRESIDENT AGREES
TO NEGOTIATE SPENDING CUTS, AS A
WAY TO END THE SHUTDOWN.
>> IT'S TIME FOR LEADERSHIP.
IT'S TIME FOR THESE NEGOTIATIONS
AND THIS CONVERSATION TO BEGIN.
I WOULD HOPE THAT THE PRESIDENT
WOULD LOOK AT THIS AS AN
OPPORTUNITY AND A GOOD FAITH
EFFORT ON OUR PART TO MOVE HALF-
WAY, HALF-WAY TO WHAT HE'S
DEMANDED, IN ORDER TO HAVE THESE
CONVERSATIONS BEGIN.
>> Reporter: BOEHNER DID NOT
MENTION EARLIER DEMANDS TO DE-
FUND OR DELAY THE HEALTH CARE
LAW AS THE PRICE OF PASSING A
CONTINUING RESOLUTION TO FUND
THE GOVERNMENT.
BUT, IDAHO CONGRESSMAN RAUL
LABRADOR-- A TEA PARTY
REPUBLICAN-- SUGGESTED THAT
ISSUE IS FAR FROM DEAD.
>> WE ARE ACTUALLY GIVING HIM
PART OF WHAT HE WANTS, WHICH IS
A CLEAN DEBT CEILING.
WE'LL GIVE HIM A CLEAN DEBT
CEILING FOR SIX WEEKS SO HE CAN
NEGOTIATE ON THE ISSUES OF THE
DEBT.
BUT WHEN IT COMES TO THE
CONTINUING RESOLUTION, WHEN IT
COMES TO DEALING WITH OBAMACARE,
WE'RE GOING TO CONTINUE TO HOLD
OUR GROUND.
>> Reporter: UP TO NOW, THENSISL
NEGOTIATE ONLY AFTER HOUSE
REPUBLICANS REOPEN THE
GOVERNMENT AND LIFT THE DEBT
CEILING.
TODAY, SPOKESMAN JAY CARNEY
CALLED THE BOEHNER OFFER AN
ENCOURAGING SIGN.
>> IF CLEAN DEBT LIMIT BILL IS
PASSED HE WOULD LIKELY SIGN IT.
AGAIN, WE WOULD HAVE TO SEE IT.
WE'RE SPEAKING OF A BILL THAT AT
THIS POINT DOES NOT EXIST.
AND IT'S NOT AT ALL CLEAR BASED
ON WHAT THE SPEAKER SAID THAT
THAT'S WHAT WE'RE GOING TO SEE.
>> Reporter: THE PUBLIC EXCHANGE
CAME AHEAD OF A PRIVATE MEETING
BETWEEN THE PRESIDENT AND A
GROUP OF HOUSE REPUBLICANS AT
THE WHITE HOUSE THIS AFTERNOON.
HE MET EARLIER WITH SENATE
DEMOCRATS, AND MAJORITY LEADER
HARRY REID CAME OUT SAYING THERE
WILL BE NO NEGOTIATIONS UNTIL
THE SHUTDOWN ENDS.
AS FOR THE REPUBLICANS' LATEST
PROPOSAL...
>> LET'S WAIT SEE WHAT THE HOUSE
DOES.
WHEN THEY SEND US SOMETHING,
WE'LL LOOK AT IT AS CLEARLY AND
AS QUICKLY AS WE CAN.
I HOPE THE REPUBLICANS DECIDE
WHAT THEY WANT, AND WE'LL BE
HAPPY TO WORK WITH THEM IN ANY
WAY.
I REPEAT FOR THE FOURTH TIME
RIGHT HERE.
EN TOPHE GOVERNMENT, LET US PAY
OUR BILLS, WE'LL NEGOTIATE WITH
YOU ABOUT ANYTHING.
>> Reporter: SENATE REPUBLICAN
LEADER MITCH McCONNELL AND HIS
MEMBERS WILL TALK WITH THE
PRESIDENT TOMORROW.
>> THAT'S A GOOD START, BUT ONLY
IF IT MEANS HE'S DECIDED TO DROP
HIS REFUSAL TO NEGOTIATE ON
SOLUTIONS.
BUT IF THIS IS A MEETING WHERE
HE SIMPLY REITERATES THAT HE
WON'T NEGOTIATE, THIS MEETING
WILL NOT BE PRODUCTIVE.
>> Reporter: THE ON-AND-OFF TALK
OF FLEXIBILITY ON BOTH SIDES ON
RAISING THE DEBT CEILING CAME
AMID FRESH WARNINGS FROM
ADMINISTRATION OFFICIALS AND
FINANCIAL LEADERS THAT ACTION IS
IMPERATIVE.
THEY ARGUED THE COUNTRY CANNOT
RUN THE RISK OF NATIONAL
DEFAULT, ONE WEEK FROM TODAY.
AT A SENATE HEARING, TREASURY
SECRETARY JACK LEW REJECTED
SUGGESTIONS THE GOVERNMENT COULD
PAY SOME BILLS, BUT NOT OTHERS.
>> HOW CAN THE UNITED STATES
CHOOSE WHETHER TO SEND SOCIAL
SECURITY CHECKS TO SENIORS OR
PAY BENEFITS TO VETERANS?
HOW CAN THE UNITED STATES CHOOSE
WHETHER TO PROVIDE CHILDREN WITH
FOOD ASSISTANCE OR MEET OUR
OBLIGATIONS TO MEDICARE
PROVIDERS?
THE UNITED STATES SHOULD NOT BE
PUT IN A POSITION OF MAKING SUCH
PERILOUS CHOICES FOR OUR ECONOMY
AND OUR CITIZENS.
THERE IS NO WAY OF KNOWING THE
>> Reporter: MEMBERS OF THE
FINANCIAL COMMUNITY SOUNDED
SIMILAR ALARMS AT ANOTHER
HEARING.
FORMER OKLAHOMA GOVERNOR FRANK
KEATING IS HEAD OF THE AMERICAN
BANKERS ASSOCIATION.
>> IF OUR NATION DEFAULTS ON ITS
THE HARM IS TO LIKELY TO BE
MEASURED IN HUNDREDS OF MILLIONS
OF DOLLARS.
EVEN THE SLIGHTEST UPTICK IN
TREASURY INTEREST RATES WOULD
CASCADE THROUGHOUT THE ECONOMY,
IT WOULD RAISE THE COST OF
TAXPAYERS TO SERVICE OUR
COUNTRY'S DEBT AND WOULD RAISE
THE BORROWING COST FOR BUSINESS.
>> Reporter: UNDERSCORING THOSE
MEANWHILE, MUCH OF THE
GOVERNMENT REMAINED SHUTTERED
FOR A TENTH DAY.
BUT THE INTERIOR DEPARTMENT DID
ANNOUNCE IT'S ALLOWING STATES TO
REOPEN NATIONAL PARKS USING
THEIR OWN MONEY.
>> Woodruff: WE GET THE LATEST
NOW, FROM MARGARET TALEV, WHITE
HOUSE CORRESPONDENT FOR
BLOOMBERG NEWS.
MARGARET, GOOD TO HAVE YOU BACK
ON THE PLAPL.
WHERE DOES EVERYTHING STAND
RIGHT NOW?
>> WOW.
THE REPUBLICAN LEADERSHIP JUST
LEFT THE WHITE HOUSE, DIDN'T
STOP AT THE MICROPHONES AND KEPT
ON GOING.
ALL OF US ARE TRYING TO GET EVEN
THE MOST PRELIMINARY INDICATIONS
OF HOW THAT MEET EGG WENT.
BUT THE WHITE HOUSE IS HOPING TO
DO TO IS SORT OF DELINEATE CAN
WE AGREE TO SET ASIDE THE WHOLE
NEGOTIATION SHUTDOWN ISSUE AND
JUST CLEAR THIS DEBT LIMIT THING
BEFORE WE MOVE ON.
UNCLEAR THE THAT THE REPUBLICANS
-- SENATE DEMOCRATS MADE VERY
CLEAR THEY HAVE NO INTENT OF
NEGOTIATING BEFORE THE SHUTDOWN
IS RESOLVED BEYOND THE DEBT
CEILING INCREASE.
THE PRESIDENT HAS LEFT A LITTLE
MORE WIGGLE ROOM IN THE WAY THAT
HE AND HIS STAFF TALK ABOUT IT
SAYING THAT THEY AGREE IN
PRINCIPLE THAT'S NOT THE RIGHT
WAY TO DO THINGS, THAT IT'S NOT
RIGHT TO HOLD AMERICANS RANSOM
BUT NOT AS CLEAR A LINE AS HARRY
REID.
>> Woodruff: DO WE KNOW WHAT HAS
CAUSED THE REPUBLICANS TO CHANGE
THEIR POSITION AND SAY THEY ARE
WILLING TO GO ALONG WITH THE
SHORT-TERM EXTENSION OF THE DEBT
CEILING INCREASE IN.
>> THERE IS TREMENDOUS PRESSURE
ON REPUBLICANS FROM THE BUSINESS
COMMUNITY AND CONCERN ABOUT HOW
THE MARKETS ARE GOING TO REACT
TOMORROW AND MONDAY.
THERE IS ALSO A SORT OF SENSE
STRATEGICALLY THAT AMID LAGGING
POLL NUMBERS AND SORT OF BROADER
PLAY FOR THESE CONCESSIONS ON
HEALTH CARE AND SPENDING THAT
THEY'RE HOPING FAR PERHAPS
THEY'RE SHOWING SOME GOOD FAITH
ON AT LEAST EXTENSION OF -- A
SHORT-TERM EXTENSION OF THE DEBT
CEILING IS THE RIGHT WAY FOR
THEM TO MOVE.
AT LEAST IS THE POSITION OF SORT
OF A CORE OF THE REPUBLICANS IN
CONGRESS.
BY NO MEANS IS THERE YOU 'NAM
ANYMORETY ON THIS, THERE IS SOME
DISAGREEMENT ABOUT WHETHER THIS
IS THE RIGHT WAY TO PURSUE IT.
>> Woodruff: SO IS THERE A SENSE
THAT THE REPUBLICANS -- THE
REPUBLICANS HAVE BEEN SAYING
THEY NEED A FIG LEAF, THEY NEED
SOMETHING FROM THE
ADMINISTRATION.
IS THERE A SENSE OF WHAT THAT
CAN BE?
>> WHAT THEY'RE -- THE WHITE
HOUSE HAS ENVISIONED HAS BEEN IS
THAT THEY'RE NOT GOING NEGOTIATE
ON ANYTHING BIG THAT THEY CARE
ABOUT.
AGAIN, THEY HAVE LEFT A LITTLE
WIGGLE ROOM ABOUT WHETHER THEY
WOULD NEGOTIATE ON MOTHERHOOD
AND APPLE PIE AND THINGS THAT
WOULDN'T COST THEM ANYTHING IN
TERMS OF THE PRESIDENT'S CORE
POLICY INITIATIVES.
SO THERE IS EVEN WITHIN THIS
WE'RE NOT GOING TO NEGOTIATE
LANGUAGE SOME ROOM FOR
NEGOTIATION.
>> Woodruff: AND THE HEALTH CARE
REFORM?
THAT THE REPUBLICANS HAD BEEN
INSISTING HAD TO BE DEFUNDED?
WHAT HAPPENED TOP THAT DEMAND?
>> WELL, THAT WOULD NOT BE PART
OF A CLEAN SIX-WEEK DEBT CEILING
EXTENSION AS WE UNDERSTAND IT.
ALTHOUGH, AGAIN, AS THE WHITE
HOUSE SPOKESMAN CARNEY NOTED
EARLIER TODAY, UNTIL THEY
ACTUALLY SEE THE LANGUAGE, THEY
ARE LOATHE TO ASSUME THEY
UNDERSTAND WHAT IT WAS.
SPEAKER BOEHNER DID SUGGEST THAT
THEY WANT TO DO THAT SIX-WEEK
EXTENSION AS PART OF REOPENING
THE NEGOTIATIONS AND THE WHITE
HOUSE'S RESPONSE WAS "WE DON'T
WANT TO NEGOTIATE UNTIL THE
SHUTDOWN IS OVER."
SO A BIG PART OF WHAT HAPPENED
IN THIS MEETING TODAY IS THE
DISCUSSION ABOUT WHETHER WHAT
SORT OF -- WHAT ARE THE RULES OF
THE GAME BETWEEN NOW AND OCTOBER
17 WHEN EVERYTHING TURNS INTO A
PUMPKIN AND IF THERE'S NOT
RESOLUTION.
>> MARGARET TALEV, BLOOMBERG
NEWS, THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
WE'LL CONTINUE TO WATCH IT.
AND I KNOW YOU WILL.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
>> Woodruff: WE'LL HAVE MORE ON
THE SHUTDOWN STORY AFTER THE
NEWS SUMMARY.
IN OTHER NEWS, WALL STREET
SOARED ON HOPES THAT THE
WASHINGTON IMPASSE IS HEADING
TOWARD RESOLUTION.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 323 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
15,126.
THE NASDAQ ROSE NEARLY 83 POINTS
TO CLOSE ABOVE 3,760.
THE 2013 NOBEL PRIZE FOR
LITERATURE WAS AWARDED TODAY TO
CANADIAN ALICE MUNRO.
THE NOBEL COMMITTEE DESCRIBED
HER AS A "MASTER OF THE
CONTEMPORARY SHORT STORY".
MUNRO BEGAN PUBLISHING HER WORK
IN THE 1960s.
SINCE THEN, HER BOOKS HAVE SOLD
MORE THAN ONE MILLION COPIES IN
THE U.S. ALONE.
MORE ON ALICE MUNRO, AT THE END
OF THE PROGRAM.
CONFUSION REIGNED IN LIBYA
TODAY, AS THE PRIME MINISTER WAS
FIRST ABDUCTED, AND THEN  FREED
HOURS LATER.
IT CAME JUST DAYS AFTER U.S.
COMMANDOS CAPTURED A TOP
AL-QAEDA FIGURE IN TRIPOLI.
WE HAVE A REPORT NARRATED BY
LINDSEY HILSUM OF "INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS."
>> Reporter: KIDNAPPED OR
ARRESTED?
AT 2:00 A.M. THE LIBYAN PRIME
MINISTER WAS SEIZED BY ARMED
MEN.
HE WAS SLEEPING IN ROOM 1213 OF
THE CORINTHIA HOTEL,
SUPPOSEDLY TRIPOLI'S SAFEST
TEMPORARY HOME TO OIL EXECUTIVES
AND DIPLOMATS.
>> ( translated ): THERE WERE A
LOT OF VEHICLES, ABOUT 150,
MARKED WITH THE LOGO OF THE
LIBYAN REVOLUTIONARY OPERATIONS
ROOM.
THEY HAD NO HEAVY ARMOUR, JUST
PERSONAL WEAPONS.
>> Reporter: ON STATE T.V., THEY
WERE TRYING TO SOUND RESOLUTE.
"NO FORCE CAN TOPPLE THE ELECTED
GOVERNMENT," SAID THE HEAD OF
THE CONGRESS, BUT THE INCIDENT
SHOWS HOW LITTLE CONTROL THE
AUTHORITIES HAVE OVER THEIR
CHAOTIC COUNTRY.
SCORES OF OFTEN FEUDING MILITIA,
SUCCESSORS TO THE
REVOLUTIONARIES WHO OVERTHREW
COLONEL QADDAFI TWO YEARS AGO,
RULE THE STREETS.
THE GROUP THAT SEIZED THE PRIME
MINISTER WAS SUPPOSED TO PROTECT
THE CAPITAL.
AT FIRST IT SEEMED THEY WERE
ANGRY THAT THE PRIME MINISTER
HAD ALLOWED THIS MAN, ANAS AL
LIBI, AN ALLEGED TERRORIST, TO
BE SNATCHED OFF THE STREETS OF
TRIPOLI BY THE AMERICANS LAST
SATURDAY.
BUT A FEW HOURS LATER, THE PRIME
MINISTER WAS FREE, IF MINUS HIS
GLASSES, MOBBED BY JOURNALISTS
NEGOTIATIONS WITH ANOTHER
MILITIA AND TRYING TO PLAY THE
WHOLE THING DOWN.
>> ( translated ): I WOULD LIKE
TO REASSURE FOREIGNERS HERE IN
LIBYA THAT WHAT HAS OCCURRED WAS
SOLELY A RESULT OF COMPLICATIONS
WITHIN LIBYAN POLITICS AND
FOREIGNERS ARE NOT TARGETS.
>> Reporter: HOW LONG AGO THIS
FEELS.
THE DAY IN AUGUST 2011, QADDAFI
FELL AND TRIPOLI ERUPTED IN JOY.
OVERTHROWING A DICTATOR HAS
PROVED MUCH EASIER THAN
REBUILDING THE STATE.
TODAY'S CHAOS MAY BE QADDAFI'S
LEGACY BUT NO ONE IN LIBYA SEEMS
TO KNOW HOW TO OVERCOME IT.
>> Woodruff: FORMER PAKISTANI
PRESIDENT PERVEZ MUSHARRAF WAS
RE-ARRESTED TODAY, AFTER BEING
RELEASED ON BAIL YESTERDAY.
THIS TIME, MUSHARRAF WAS TAKEN
INTO CUSTODY ON ACCUSATIONS
INVOLVING A DEADLY RAID ON A
MILITANT MOSQUE IN 2007.
HE'S FACED A HOST OF CRIMINAL
CHARGES SINCE RETURNING FROM
EXILE IN MARCH.
IN EGYPT, THE MILITARY-BACKED
GOVERNMENT CRITICIZED THE U.S.
DECISION TO SLASH MILLIONS OF
DOLLARS IN AID.
A SPOKESMAN FOR THE FOREIGN
MINISTRY INSISTED, "EGYPT WILL
NOT SURRENDER TO AMERICAN
PRESSURE."
MEANWHILE,  SECRETARY OF STATE
JOHN KERRY SAID THE U.S. MIGHT
RESTORE SOME AID, IF EGYPT MAKES
PROGRESS IN RESTORING DEMOCRACY.
HE SPOKE IN MALAYSIA.
>> I THINK THE INTERIM
GOVERNMENT UNDERSTANDS VERY WELL
OUR COMMITMENT TO THE SUCCESS OF
THIS GOVERNMENT WHICH WE WANT TO
SEE ACHIEVED.
AND BY NO MEANS IS THIS A
WITHDRAWAL FROM OUR RELATIONSHIP
OR A SEVERING OF OUR SERIOUS
COMMITMENT TO HELPING THE
GOVERNMENT MEET THOSE GOALS.
>> Woodruff: THE U.S. HAS BEEN
PROVIDING EGYPT WITH ABOUT ONE
AND A HALF BILLION DOLLARS A
YEAR IN AID.
FORMER DETROIT MAYOR KWAME
KILPATRICK WAS SENTENCED TODAY
TO 28 YEARS IN PRISON.
HE'D BEEN CONVICTED IN MARCH OF
FEDERAL CHARGES INCLUDING
RACKETEERING, BRIBERY, MAIL
FRAUD AND TAX COUNTS.
KILPATRICK SERVED AMAYOS R FROM
2002 UNTIL HE RESIGNED IN 2008.
THE CLEVELAND, OHIO MAN WHO HELD
THREE WOMEN CAPTIVE FOR YEARS,
MAY NOT HAVE COMMITTED SUICIDE
AFTER ALL.
ARIEL CASTRO WAS FOUND DEAD IN
HIS PRISON CELL LAST MONTH, WITH
A SHEET AROUND HIS NECK.
STATE INVESTIGATORS REPORTED
TODAY THAT HE MAY HAVE BEEN
CHOKING HIMSELF AS PART OF A SEX
ACT.
THEY ALSO FOUND THAT TWO PRISON
GUARDS REPEATEDLY FAILED TO
CHECK ON CASTRO.
PIONEERING ASTRONAUT SCOTT
CARPENTER-- THE SECOND AMERICAN
TO ORBIT THE EARTH-- DIED TODAY.
HE'D HAD A STROKE, AND PASSED
AWAY IN A DENVER HOSPICE.
CARPENTER WAS ONE OF THE
ORIGINAL MERCURY SEVEN.
JOHN GLENN IS NOW THE LAST
SURVIVING MEMBER OF THE GROUP.
SCOTT CARPENTER WAS 88 YEARS
OLD.
STILL AHEAD ON THE "NEWSHOUR":
WHAT'S DRIVING THE REPUBLICAN
AGENDA; PROBLEMS WITH THE NEW
ONLINE HEALTH CARE EXCHANGES; A
CENSUS IN BOSNIA; REVEALING
SCARS FROM THE COUNTRY'S PAINFUL
PAST; THE FALLOUT FROM THE
PRESIDENT SKIPPING A KEY ASIA
SUMMIT AND A NOBEL PRIZE FOR
ALICE MUNRO.
>> Woodruff: WE RETURN NOW TO
OUR LEAD STORY.
WITH THE GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN IN
ITS TENTH DAY AND STARK
POLITICAL LINES DRAWN, WE
EXPLORE SOME OF THE UNDERLYING
FORCES AT WORK.
FOR THAT PERSPECTIVE, I SPOKE A
SHORT TIME AGO WITH A FORMER
MEMBER OF CONGRESS AND A
LONGTIME OBSERVER OF CAPITOL
HILL.
NORMAN ORNSTEIN OF THE AMERICAN
ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE IS THE
CO-AUTHOR OF A BOOK TITLED "IT'S
WORSE THAN IT LOOKS: HOW THE
AMERICAN CONSTITUTIONAL SYSTEM
COLLIDED WITH THE NEW POLITICS
OF EXTREMISM."
AND FORMER CONGRESSMAN TOM DAVIS
IS A REPUBLICAN FROM VIRGINIA
WHO NOW IS DIRECTOR OF FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS FOR DELOITTE
& TOUCHE.
GENTLEMEN, WELCOME BACK TO THE
NEWSHOUR TO BOTH OF YOU.
>> SO TOM DAVIS, THE ICE HAS
APPARENTLY CRACKED, AT LEAST FOR
SOME REPUBLICANS, THEY'RE
OFFERING A SHORT-TERM DEAL ON
THE DEBT LIMIT.
WHERE IS THIS HEADED, DO YOU
THINK?
>> I THINK WE'RE HEADED FOR A
SHORT-TERM DEAL.
I THINK AT THE END OF THE DAY
IT'S GOING TO -- WE'LL GET A
C.R. AS WELL.
>> Woodruff: CONTINUING
RESOLUTION.
>> I THINK SO.
IT JUST MAKES SENSE.
BUT YOU HAVE TO START SOMEWHERE
TO END UP SOMEWHERE.
EVERYBODY IS SCARED TO DEATH AT
THE DEBT CEILING.
NOBODY WANTS TO BE HELD
ACCOUNTABLE FOR WHAT HAPPENS
AFTER THAT, WHAT HAPPENS TO THE
COUNTRY AND I THINK AMERICANISM
HAS BRIEFLY TAKEN OVER
PARTISANSHIP ON THAT PARTICULAR
ISSUE.
THE C.R. IS A LITTLE MORE -- TO
SOME MEMBERS WHO --.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE
SPENDING.
>> YES, CONTINUING THE SPENDING
ISSUES, A LOT OF MEMBERS IN THE
REPUBLICAN CONFERENCE DON'T FEEL
THAT AS MUCH IN THEIR DISTRICTS
BUT REMEMBER THIS: YOU'VE GOT 25
30 MEMBERS THAT THIS IS HURTING
THEM.
THEY'RE IN MARGINAL SEAT, THEY
HAVE A LOT OF FEDERAL EMPLOYEES
GOING ALONG
WITH THIS.
>> Woodruff: 25 OR 30
REPUBLICANS?
>> RIGHT, IN SWING SEATS.
>> Woodruff: NORM, COULD THIS BE
THE BEGINNING OF A RESOLUTION OR
WHAT DO YOU THINK?
>> THE PROBLEM WITH THE DEAL IS
WE GET MORE BRINKSMANSHIP IN SIX
WEEKS OR SO.
THE INITIAL DEAL THAT WAS
PROPOSED BY PAUL RYAN AND THEN
SPEAKER BOEHNER WAS TO TAKE A
SIX-WEEK EXTENSION IN THE DEBT
LIMIT NOW TAKE AWAY ALL THE
FLEXIBILITY FROM THE TREASURY
DURING THAT PERIOD OF TIME AND
IN EFFECT SAYING WE'RE GOING TO
GO RIGHT UP TO THE CLIFF, YOU
BETTER MAKE SOME CHANGES BEFORE
THEN.
IT'S MORE "DO THIS OR ELSE."
AND IT'S -- IF WE DO GET A
RESOLUTION THAT REOPENS THE
GOVERNMENT, IT EASES THE
PRESSURE A LITTLE BUILT.
THE PROBLEM IS YOU'VE GOT TO
FIND A DEAL WHERE AT LEAST EACH
SIDE CAN SAY "WE'VE HELD FIRM ON
WHAT MATTERS" AND WE'RE NOT
THERE YET.
THE SPEAKER HASN'T BEEN CLEAR
WHAT HE WANTS OR WHAT THEY'LL DO
AND IF YOU PUT ALL OF THE BIG
SPENDING ISSUES ON THE TABLE
ALONG WITH REVENUES WE'RE NOT
GONNA RESOLVE THAT IN SIX WEEKS.
>> Woodruff: LET'S BROADEN THIS
OUT.
TOM DAVIS, WHAT ARE THE
PRESSURES ON THE SPEAKER RIGHT
NOW AND IS THERE ANYTHING HE
COULD OR SHOULD HAVE DONE
DIFFERENTLY TO HEAD THIS OFF?
>> THE MAIN PRESSURE IS HE'S GOT
80% OF HIS CAUCUS IS ABSOLUTELY
SAFE REPUBLICAN DISTRICTS.
YOU GO HOME AND TALK TO NOBODY
BUT REPUBLICANS AND THE
REPUBLICAN BASE AND THEY ARE
TELLING THEIR MEMBERS "STAND
TOUGH, DON'T COMPROMISE, WE WANT
TO GET RID OF OBAMACARE, DON'T
GIVE INTO THE PRESIDENT."
FOR THEM IT'S A WIN-LOSE
PROPOSITION.
FOR THIS TO WORK IT HAS TO BE A
WIN-WIN PROPOSITION.
THE PRESIDENT OPENED THE DOOR
WHEN HE SAID HE WOULD NEGOTIATE
OVER THE SEQUESTERING BUT THOSE
DISCUSSIONS CAN BE BROADENED TO
INCLUDE OTHER THINGS SO AT LEAST
THEY'RE TALKING.
>> Woodruff: HELP US UNDERSTAND,
THOUGH, NORM, IF THE SPEAKER
COULDN'T HAVE DONE ANYTHING
DIFFERENT, WAS THIS JUST AN
INEVITABLE MOMENT WE WERE COMING
TO?
>> IT WAS AN INEVITABLE MOMENT.
AND THE SAD THING TO BEGIN WITH
IS THAT WE ACTUALLY HAD A DEAL
ON THE TABLE THAT THE SPEAKER
HAD AGREED TO TO KEEP THE
GOVERNMENT RUNNING FOR ANOTHER
YEAR AND IT WAS ONE WHERE THE
DEMOCRATS HAD GIVEN IN ON ALL
THE SPENDING NUMBERS REPUBLICANS
WANTED AND KEEPING THE SEQUESTER
FOR THE YEAR.
THEN THE SPEAKER CAME UNDER
PRESSURE IN TED CRUZ AND A GROUP
OF OTHERS TO INSTEAD SAY NO, WE
WANT TO END OBAMACARE.
THAT TOOK US DOWN A DIFFERENT
PATH.
IF THE SPEAKER HAD HELD FIRM ON
THAT, WE MIGHT BE IN A DIFFERENT
PLACE.
HAVING SAID THAT, ONCE YOU HAVE
PRESSURE ONCE AGAIN TO USE THE
DEBT LIMIT AS A HOSTAGE, FINDING
A WAY OUT OF THAT THAT DOESN'T
HAVE MOST OF YOUR MEMBERS UPSET
IS A REALLY TOUGH SELL AND ONE
OF THE THINGS THAT NOBODY WANTS
TO GO OVER THE CLIFF.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT'S GOT ME
CONCERNED IS THERE ARE PLENTY OF
NUMBERS AND OTHERS OUTSIDE
SAYING "NO BIG DEAL, GO AHEAD
AND DEFAULT."
AND THAT'S DANGEROUS.
>> Woodruff: HOW MUCH INFLUENCE
DOES THE TEA PARTY HAVE GOING
FORWARD IN YOUR PARTY?
IN THE REPUBLICAN PARTY.
>> WELL, THE PARTY WAS A
SKELETON AFTER THE BUSH YEARS.
WE'D GONE THROUGH THE PROBLEMS
WITH THE WAR WHICH WAS UNPOPULAR
YOU HAD AN ECONOMIC MELTDOWN,
YOU HAD KATRINA AND THEY JUST
RUSHED IN AND FILLED THAT VOID
AT THIS POINT AND THEY ADDED
ENERGY TO THE PARTY AND THEN
BASICALLY IN MANY AREAS TOOK
OVER THE NOMINATION PROCESS AND
ELECTED THEIR PEOPLE AND THEY
HAVE BEEN GIVEN POLITICAL MUSCLE
THROUGH SOME OF THESE OUTSIDE
POLITICAL ACTION ORGANIZATIONS
THAT HAVE ADDED MONEY TO THE
GRASS-ROOTS.
>> Woodruff: SO YOU'RE SAYING
THEY'RE HERE TO STAY?
>> I THINK'S A DANGER FOR
REPUBLICANS HERE THAT IF THEY
SPURN THE TEA PARTY YOU CAN GET
A SPINOFF.
YOU'RE SEEING THIS IN SOME
STREETS WHERE LIBERTARIANS ARE
RUNNING AND TAKING 6%, 8%, 10%
OF THE VOTES FROM REPUBLICANS.
IT COST US A SENATE SEAT IN
MONTANA AND ARIZONA LAST TIME.
SO REPUBLICANS HAVE TO BE VERY,
VERY CAREFUL THIS W THIS.
I'D ADD ONE OTHER THING.
FROM A REPUBLICAN PERSPECTIVE
YOU ONLY HAVE TWO PRESSURE
POINTS WHERE YOU CAN CHANGE THE
TRAJECTORY OF SPENDING AND THIS
IS YOUR ANNUAL APPROPRIATIONS
AND THE DEBT CEILING.
SO IT'S NOT THE BEST CHOICES BUT
THEY'RE THE ONLY PRESSURE POINTS
YOU HAVE.
OTHERWISE YOU'RE TALKING TO A
WALL.
>> Woodruff: PRESSURE POINTS
WHEN THERE'S A DEMOCRATIC
PRESIDENT.
>> WHEN YOU'RE SURROUNDED BY A
SENATE AND PRESIDENT OF THE
OTHER PARTY.
>> Woodruff: SO, NORM, ARE WE
LOOKING AT JUST A STEADY -- JUST
ONE SHOWDOWN, MAYBE EVEN
SHUTDOWN OF THE GOVERNNT AMEFTER
ANOTHER GOING FORWARD?
>> I HOPE NOT BECAUSE OF COURSE
THE GREAT IRONY HERE IS IF YOU
CARE ABOUT SPENDING SHUTTING
DOWN THE GOVERNMENT IS
EXTRAORDINARILY COSTLY.
IT'S COSTING US BILLIONS A WEEK
TO DO THIS, NOT TO MENTION THE
HUMAN COST.
AND THE THREAT OF DEFAULT ITSELF
IS ALREADY CAUSING INTEREST
RATES TO INCH UP WHICH IS GOING
TO BE COSTLY TO THE GOVERNMENT,
PEOPLE GETTING MORTGAGES AND
UNTIL THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY.
BUT, YOU KNOW, TOM IS RIGHT THAT
THOSE ARE THE PRESSURE POINTS.
THE DIFFICULTY WE HAVE IS THE
CURRENT REPUBLICAN PARTY IS
USING THE DEBT LIMIT IN A WAY
THAT IT HASN'T BEEN USED BEFORE:
AS A REAL THROAT GO INTO
DEFAULT.
AS A METHOD OF EXTORTION.
THAT'S SOMETHING THAT CAN'T GO
ON AND WE HAVE TO CHANGE THE
METHOD OF NEGOTIATING.
WHAT I HAD HOPED THEY WOULD DO
IS CREATE A PERMANENT SOLUTION
LIKE THE ONE MITCH McCONNELL
USED TO GET US OUT OF THE LAST
DEADLINE IN 2007, BASICALLY WHAT
THE PRESIDENT PRETTY MUCH RAISED
THE DEBT CEILING AND HAD ONLY
ONE-THIRD OF THE MEMBERS OF ONE
HOUSE REQUIRED TO DO THAT AND
THEN MOVED TO A DIFFERENT PLANE.
>> Woodruff: TOM DAVIS, HE'S
SAYING THEY'RE USING IT
DIFFERENTEDLY TIME AND IN A
DANGEROUS WAY.
HOW DO YOU SEE IT?
DO YOU SEE THIS CONTINUING?
>> IT'S THE ONLY LEVERAGE POINT
YOU HAVE, RAISING THE DEBT
CEILING.
AND THE PUBLIC DOESN'T
UNDERSTAND IF YOU'RE RAISING THE
DEBT CEILING MAKE SURE WE DON'T
HAVE TO GO THROUGH THIS AGAIN.
CAN WE FIND SOME OFFSETS?
IT IS A CHANCE TO HAVE SOME
CONVERSATION AND CHANGE THE
TRAJECTORY ON SPENDING BUT NORM
IS RIGHT.
YOU GET TOO CLOSE TO THE EDGE ON
THIS THING, IT HAS AFFECTS ON
MARKETS, THE ECONOMY, THE
AVERAGE PERSON AND ON THE
FEDERAL BUDGET SO IN A WAY IF
IT'S HANDLED WRONGLY-- AS I
THINK WE'VE COME CLOSE TO DOING
THIS TIME-- IT HURT WHAT IS
YOU'RE TRYING TO FIX.
>> Woodruff: GRIM MESSAGE.
TOM DAVIS, NORMAN ORNSTEIN, WE
THANK YOU BOTH.
>> THANK YOU, JUDY.
>> THANKS.
>> Woodruff: WE CHECK BACK IN ON
THE TROUBLED LAUNCH OF THE NEW
ONLINE HEALTH CARE MARKETPLACES
KNOWN AS EXCHANGES.
IT'S BEEN MORE THAN A WEEK SINCE
THEY FIRST OPENED.
MILLIONS OF PEOPLE HAVE TRIED TO
NAVIGATE THE FEDERAL EXCHANGE AT
healthcare.gov, BUT FOUND MAJOR
PROBLEMS REGISTERING AND
ENROLLING.
IT IS THE MARKETPLACE FOR 36
STATES THAT HAVE NOT SET UP
THEIR OWN UNIQUE WEBSITE.
TONIGHT, RAY SUAREZ LOOKS AT
WHAT'S KNOWN ABOUT THOSE
PROBLEMS.
>> Suarez: MILLIONS OF PEOPLE
FOR THAT, CRAIG TIMBERG IS THE
"WASHINGTON POST'S" NATIONAL
TECHNOLOGY REPORTER.
HE'S BEEN FOLLOWING THE STORY
AND TRYING TO EXPLAIN WHAT'S
BEHIND THE COMPLICATIONS SO FAR.
CRAIG, WELCOME BACK.
IF YOU SIGN ON TO YOUR COMPUTER
TODAY AND GO TO THE EXCHANGE WEB
SITE WHAT ARE YOU LIKELY TO FIND
TODAY?
>> WELL, IT'S CERTAINLY FASTER
THAN IT WAS THIS TIME LAST WEEK.
THERE ARE ELEMENTS THAT WORK AND
WE GET THE SENSE THAT SOME
PEOPLE ARE SIGNING UP
SUCCESSFULLY, WE JUST DON'T KNOW
HOW MANY BECAUSE THE GOVERNMENT
HASN'T TOLD US YET.
>> Suarez: IS PART OF THE
PROBLEM THAT YOU HAVE TO DO THE
WHOLE REGISTRATION PROTOCOL JUST
TO SHOP AROUND?
JUST TO TAKE AN EXPLORATORY LOOK
AT WHAT'S WAITING FOR YOU?
>> IT'S CLEARLY ONE OF THE
PROBLEMS THAT BOTTLENECKS WERE
BUILT INTO THE SYSTEM.
WHEN YOU GO SHOPPING ON A WEB
SITE AND BUY DOG FOOD, YOU DON'T
HAVE TO WAIT FOR YOUR CREDIT
DOORD GO THROUGH, IT WILL SAY
"THANKS FOR YOUR ORDER."
IF THERE'S A CREDIT CARD PROBLEM
IT WILL I TELL YOU LATER.
THIS WEB SITE ISN'T BUILT THAT
WAY, IF YOU'RE STUCK YOU'RE
STUCK.
>> Suarez: EARLIER ON THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION SAID THE SLOW
TIMES AND THE WAITS AT THE
PORTALS WERE EVIDENCE THAT A LOT
OF PEOPLE WERE TRYING TO SIGN ON
AND TAKE A LOOK.
PEOPLE WHO WERE DETRACTORS OF
JUST WASN'T READY
TO BE UNVEILED.
DO WE HAVE ANY SENSE OF WHETHER
OR NOT WHETHER IT IS HERE IS
VOLUME SLOWING THINGS DOWN?
>> I THINK BOTH OF THOSEY TRUE,
RIGHTING?
IT'S CLEAR THAT THERE'S
SIGNIFICANT FLAWS IN THE WAY THE
SYSTEM WAS BUILT TO HANDLE THE
AMOUNT OF TRAFFIC THAT IT'S
GOTTEN.
THAT'S EVIDENT.
SO, YEAH, IF NOT THAT MANY
PEOPLE WERE INTERESTED IN IT IT
PROBABLY WOULD HAVE WORKED FINE.
SO, YEAH, GETTING VERY HIGH
VOLUME BUS THEY PROBABLY COULD
HAVE BUILT IT BETTER, TOO.
>> Suarez: SOME OF THE PROBLEMS
STEM FROM THE COMPLEXITY OF THE
TRANSACTIONS THAT WE'RE ASKING
THE SYSTEM TO MAKE.
YOU'RE COORDINATING DIFFERENT
PARTS OF GOVERNMENT, PUTTING IN
PLACE TAX CREDITS AND RECORDING
YOUR SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER OR
ARE THEY MORE BASIC-- PEOPLE
JUST NOT BEING ABLE TO WHEN THEY
PUNCH THEIR INFORMATION IN GET
PROPERLY SERVED AND GET PROPERLY
REGISTERD?
>> IT'S REALLY A COMBINATION OF
THESE THINGS.
BECAUSE THE SYSTEM SEEMS TO BE
STRUGGLING TO RESOLVE SOME OF
THESE ISSUES, TO COMMUNICATE
ACROSS NETWORKS, THAT'S WHY
PEOPLE ARE HAVING THESE
PROBLEMS.
AND A LOT OF THE BACKUPS SEEM TO
BE AT THE AUTHENTICATION MOMENT
WHERE YOU PUT IN YOUR NAME AND
ADDRESS AND THE SYSTEM IS TRYING
TO FIGURE OUT WHO YOU ARE AND
ISSUE YOU AN I.D..
THERE'S BEEN A STICKINESS ABOUT
THAT.
IT'S BEEN HARD TO UNTANGLE AND
SOME OF THAT MAY WELL HAVE TO DO
WITH THE CALCULATING THE
MACHINERY HAS TO DO.
>> Suarez: SO WHEN YOU PROPOSE
TO FIX IT-- ONCE YOU'RE THE
GOVERNMENT AND YOU SAY "YES, WE
MUST MAKE THIS BETTER"-- IS THAT
TOUGHER TO DO WHILE STILL
KEEPING THE EXCHANGES OPEN?
YOU'RE TRYING TO, IN EFFECT,
REPAIR A CAR WHILE IT'S DRIVING
DOWN THE HIGHWAY AREN'T YOU?
>> CERTAINLY.
THERE'S NO QUESTION THAT WOULD
HAVE BEEN EASIER TO FIX A MONTH
AGO THAN IT IS NOW.
EVEN BASIC THINGS LIKE PUTTING
MORE SERVER CAPACITY ON IT SO
YOU CAN HANDLE THE CRUSH OF
TRAFFIC, IT'S EASIER TO DO WHEN
PEOPLE AREN'T USING IT AT THE
SAME TIME OR AT LEAST TRYING TO
USE IT.
>> Suarez: IS SOME OF THIS
TAKING CARE OF ITSELF?
BECAUSE THERE IS SIX MONTHS OF
OPENING TO TAKE A LOOK AND BUY
YOUR INSURANCE, IS THE TRAFFIC
SMOOTHING OUT, PUTTING LESS
CAPACITY ON THE SYSTEM?
WAS IT, IN PART, THE RUSH TO THE
OPENING DOOR THAT HAPPENED ON OR
AROUND OCTOBER 1?
>> CERTAINLY THAT'S PART OF IT.
I MEAN, THERE'S AN ACTUAL
NARRATIVE TO THE RELEASES OF NEW
TECHNOLOGY.
THEY'RE ALMOST ALWAYS AT LEAST A
LITTLE BIT BUGGY AND IF LOTS OF
PEOPLE USE IT THEY EXPOSE THE
PROBLEMS AND THEY GET GRADUALLY
IRONED OUT.
NOW, IT'S UNUSUAL TO HAVE A
SYSTEM FAIL AS BADLY AS THIS
SYSTEM IS FAILING IN ITS FIRST
FEW DAYS, BUT THESE THINGS DO
TEND TO GET WORKED OUT WITH TIME
EVEN WHEN IT'S GOOGLE OR APPLE.
>> Suarez: IS THERE ANY
INDICATION HOW LONG IT'S GOING
TO TAKE TO FIX THIS SO THAT ANY
CUSTOMER COMING TO THE EXCHANGE
WINDOW WILL BE ABLE TO HAVE A
TROUBLE-FREER ROHR-FREE
EXPERIENCE?
>> THAT CRYSTAL BALL FAILS ME A
LITTLE BIT HERE, I'M AFRAID.
BUT I CAN TELL YOU THAT TECH
PEOPLE I HAVE BEEN SPEAKING TO
ON THIS STORY ARE FAIRLY
OPTIMISTIC THAT THESE ARE
SOLVEABLE PROBLEMS IF YOU THROW
ROE SOURCES AT IT.
THAT YOU CAN SMOOTH IT OUT.
>> Suarez: WHAT ABOUT OTHER
STATES RUNNING THEIR OWN
EXCHANGES.
IN THE CASE OF THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT, WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
MORE THAN 30 DIFFERENT STATES
THAT THEY'RE COORDINATING THE
EXCHANGES FOR.
BUT OTHER PLACES LIKE CALIFORNIA
NEW YORK, AND OTHERS ARE DOING
IT THEMSELVES.
HAS THE BUYER EXPERIENCE BEEN
BETTER IN THOSE PLACES?
>> IT REALLY DEPENDS WHERE YOU
ARE.
IN SOME STATES IT'S GONE PRETTY
SMOOTHLY.
OTHER STATES THAT HAVE PROBLEMS
THAT CLOSELY RESEMBLE WHAT THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT IS HAVING AND
SO IT'S A COMPLEX PIECE OF
PROGRAMMING THAT THEY'VE TRIED
TO PUT TOGETHER AND THE STATES
IN SOME CASES HAVE HAD SIMILAR
PROBLEMS.
>> Suarez: IS ANYBODY-- EITHER
THE STATES RUNNING THEIR OWN OR
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION--
SAYING HOW MANY AMERICANS HAVE
ACTUALLY TAKEN ADVANTAGE OF THIS
SYSTEM?
>> SOME STATES HAVE BEEN
REPORTING NUMBERS.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS NOT
YET.
WE'RE SUPPOSED TO GET SOME SORT
OF NUMBER IN NOVEMBER WHICH IF
YOU LOOK AT YOUR CALENDAR IS A
LITTLE WAYS AWAY.
>> Suarez: AND THEN WE'LL HAVE A
BETTER IDEA OF JUST HOW WELL
WE'RE HANDLING THE CRUSH AT THE
FRONT DOOR?
>> I THINK IT WILL BE HARD TO
TELL HOW WE WERE HANDLING IT IN
EARLY TO MID-OCTOBER BUT I THINK
WE WILL HAVE A BETTER SENSE THEN
IF THE PROBLEMS HAVE BEEN IRONED
OUT SUBSTANTIALLY ENOUGH THAT
THE SYSTEM BASICALLY WORKS.
>> Suarez: CRAIG TIMBERG OF THE
"WASHINGTON POST," THANK YOU FOR
JOINING US.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Woodruff: WE TURN NOW TO
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA, WHERE A
NATIONWIDE SURVEY IS FORCING THE
COUNTRY TO REVISIT ITS DIFFICULT
HISTORY.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT KIRA KAY
REPORTS.
>> Reporter: ON THE EVE OF
BOSNIA'S NATIONWIDE CENSUS, THE
MUNICIPAL HALL OF THE TOWN OFUMH
CENSUS TAKERS COLLECTING THEIR
MATERIALS.
RADA JEREMIC IS SUPERVISING.
>> ( translated ): FROM 9:00 IN
THE MORNING UNTIL 9:00 AT NIGHT,
THEY WILL ALL DEPLOY TO THE
HOUSES THEY'VE BEEN ASSIGNED.
THE MAIN FORM INCLUDES QUESTIONS
LIKE PLACE AND DATE OF BIRTH,
PROFESSION, EDUCATION.
THIS CENSUS IS HISTORIC AND WE
ARE TAKING THIS ASSIGNMENT VERY
SERIOUSLY.
>> Reporter: 20-YEAR-OLD LAW
STUDENT ISMETA BEGIC WAS EAGER
TO LEARN MORE ABOUT HER COUNTRY.
>> ( translated ): THROUGH THE
CENSUS, WE WILL ANSWER OUR
PRESSING QUESTIONS.
BOSNIA LOST A LOT OF PEOPLE.
NOW WE WILL BE ABLE TO SEE HOW
MANY OF US THERE ARE, HOW MANY
ARE MISSING, HOW MANY FAMILIES
HAVE GAINED NEW MEMBERS.
>> Reporter: THE LAST OFFICIAL
COUNT IN BOSNIA WAS IN 1991,
WHEN 4.4 MILLION PEOPLE LIVED
HERE.
44% OF THEM WERE MUSLIM
BOSNIAKS, 31% ORTHODOX SERBS AND
17% CATHOLIC CROATS.
BUT THEN BRUTAL ETHNIC WAR BROKE
OUT BETWEEN THEM.
THAT CONFLICT KILLED 100,000
PEOPLE, DROVE TWO MILLION FROM
THEIR HOMES, AND TAUGHT THE
WORLD THE TERM ETHNIC CLEANSING.
TODAY MASS GRAVES ARE STILL
BEING DISCOVERED.
A 1995 PEACE DEAL CARVED
AUTONOMOUS ETHNIC ENTITIES OUT
OF THIS ONCE INTERMINGLED
REGION.
POLITICAL ANALYST SRECKO LATAL
SAYS THE CENSUS PROVIDES AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR BOSNIA TO ACCEPT
ITS STARKLY DIVIDED REALITY AND
FINALLY MOVE ON.
>> HOWEVER, I'M CONCERNED THAT
IT MAY BE USED AND MISUSED BY
VARIOUS POLITICAL PLAYERS TO
SEAL, CEMENT THE ETHNIC
CLEANSING OR EVEN DEEPEN THE
ETHNIC DIVISIONS WITHIN THE
COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: A NEW CENSUS WAS
REQUIRED BY THE EUROPEAN UNION
BEFORE BOSNIA COULD QUALIFY TO
JOIN ITS RANKS.
THE PROCESS WAS DELAYED A YEAR
BECAUSE OF TECHNICAL CONCERNS
AND POLITICAL WRANGLING OVER THE
SCOPE OF THE QUESTIONS.
THE FINAL SURVEY INCLUDES 77
ITEMS, BUT ALL FOCUS IS ON THE
THREE THAT ASK CITIZENS THEIR
ETHNICITY, RELIGION AND
LANGUAGE.
>> INTERNATIONAL OFFICIALS FROM
THE VERY BEGINNING MADE IT VERY
CLEAR THAT THIS IS LEAST
IMPORTANT QUESTION FOR THEM.
HOWEVER, FOR THIS COUNTRY, THIS
WAS THE NUMBER ONE IF NOT THE
ONLY QUESTION, AND LOSING
NUMBERS IS PERCEIVED AS A THREAT
AND A POSSIBILITY FOR BEING
DOMINATED BY OTHER ETHNIC
GROUPS.
>> Reporter: AS PART OF THE 1995
PEACE AGREEMENT, KEY GOVERNMENT
POSITIONS AND CIVIL SERVICE JOBS
WERE APPORTIONED BETWEEN ETHNIC
GROUPS BASED ON THE 1991 CENSUS.
AND SO NOW, LEADERS OF ALL THREE
OF THE COUNTRY'S MAJORITY ETHNIC
GROUPS ARE CAMPAIGNING TO ENSURE
PEOPLE DECLARE WHO THEY ARE,
LOUD AND CLEAR.
THE RACE FOR NUMBERS CAN BE
HEARD IN CHURCH, WHERE CATHOLIC
PRIESTS MOTIVATE THEIR LARGELY
CROAT FLOCK.
>> ( translated ): THE RESULTS
COULD DETERMINE THE FUTURE, NOT
JUST FOR SOCIETY IN BOSNIA AND
HERZEGOVINA BUT ALSO FOR THE
CROATS AND THE CATHOLIC CHURCH.
>> Reporter: THE SAME RALLYING
CALL CAN BE HEARD DURING FRIDAY
PRAYERS AT MOSQUES ACROSS THE
COUNTRY, FROM SARAJEVO TO
SREBRENICA.
>> ( translated ): WE ARE
BOSNIAKS; WE SPEAK THE BOSNIAN
LANGUAGE; OUR RELIGION IS ISLAM.
THERE'S NO DILEMMA ABOUT THAT.
>> Reporter: SREBRENICA IMAM
DAMIR PESTALIC SAYS ITS VITAL
FOR BOSNIAK MUSLIMS HERE TO
DECLARE THEIR IDENTITY, GIVEN
THE REALITY THAT TODAY, THE TOWN
SITS WITHIN SERB TERRITORY AND
HAS BECOME SERB MAJORITY.
>> ( translated ): IN NORMAL
COUNTRIES A CENSUS IS A
TECHNICAL THING BUT TO TALK
ABOUT IT IN SREBRENICA IS VERY
PAINFUL.
SREBRENICA WENT THROUGH A
GENOCIDE.
MORE THAN 8,000 PEOPLE WERE
KILLED, SOME 20,000 WERE
EXPELLED.
TODAY WE HAVE ONLY 4,000 TO
5,000 BOSNIAKS WHO HAVE RETURNED
TO SREBRENICA.
IF PEOPLE DON'T MANAGE TO GET
PROPERLY COUNTED, THE NUMBERS,
GOD FORBID, COULD BE POLITICALLY
MISUSED LATER.
>> ( translated ): I SAID
ISMETA, SHOULD YOU DO THIS?
MAYBE YOU WILL UNCOVER SOMETHING
THAT WILL HURT YOU.
BUT I'M JUST THAT TYPE OF
PERSON.
I WANT TO KNOW EVERYTHING ABOUT
WHAT'S GOING ON WITH MY
SREBRENICA.
>> Reporter: CENSUS TAKER ISMETA
BEGIC'S PERSONAL STORY
ILLUSTRATES THESE SENSITIVITIES.
SHE WAS ONLY TWO YEARS OLD IN
1995, WHEN SHE, HER MOTHER AND
SIBLINGS WERE EXPELLED FROM
SREBRENICA BY SERB TROOPS.
ISMETA'S FATHER TRIED TO FLEE BY
FOOT BUT WAS CAUGHT AND
MASSACRED ALONG WITH 8,000 OTHER
MOSTLY MEN AND BOYS.
ISMETA AND HER FAMILY RETURNED
IN 2002 TO STAKE A CLAIM TO THIS
TOWN FOR BOSNIAK MUSLIMS WHO, SO
HAVE SO FAR BEEN UNABLE OR
UNWILLING TO MOVE BACK.
>> NEW CENSUS WILL BRING
REALISTIC SITUATION ON THE
GROUND.
BUT THAT REALISTIC SITUATION WAS
NOT NATURAL MIGRATION, IT WAS
MIGRATION DUE TO WAR.
>> Reporter: CAMIL DURAKOVIC WAS
BORN IN SREBRENICA, BUT FLED TO
THE UNITED STATES DURING THE
WAR.
HE HAS RETURNED AND LAST YEAR
WAS ELECTED MAYOR.
TODAY HE KEEPS AN UNEASY PEACE
WITH HIS SERB-POLITICIAN
COUNTERPARTS.
BECAUSE OF ITS HISTORY,
SREBRENICA OBSERVES A MANDATED
BALANCE OF HALF BOSNIAK-HALF
SERB LEADERSHIP.
BUT DURAKOVIC WORRIES THERE WILL
BE PRESSURE TO CHANGE, ONCE NEW
NUMBERS ARE FORMALIZED.
>> IF SOMEBODY SAYS THAT
AGGRESSION, GENOCIDE AND ETHNIC
CLEANSING IS A LEGAL WAY OF
CHANGING DEMOGRAPHIC PICTURE,
THEN I AM AFRAID, WHERE DO I
LIVE.
SO, WE NEED INFORMATION BUT IS
SOMEBODY THINKS THAT NEW
INFORMATION WILL BE ACCEPTED AS
NEWLY ESTABLISHED LEGAL NUMBERS
THEN WE ARE IN TROUBLE.
>> ( translated ): THE DIGITS
AND NUMBERS WILL NEVER BE PUT
ASIDE, ESPECIALLY BECAUSE
THEY'RE PULLING TOWARD THEIR
SIDE AND WE'RE PULLING TOWARD
OUR SIDE.
THAT'S CLEAR.
WE HAVE TO WORK TOGETHER, WE
HAVE TO SIT AT THE SAME TABLE.
BUT IT WILL ALWAYS BE I'M THIS
AND YOU'RE THAT.
>> Reporter: ISMETA'S CENSUS
COLLEAGUE, RADA JEREMIC, WHO IS
ETHNICALLY SERB AND WHOSE FAMILY
WAS ALSO DISPLACED, SAYS WORKING
ON THE CENSUS IS OFFERING A
FIRST, SMALL OPENING.
>> I'VE MET AT LEAST 15 PEOPLE
WHO ARE BOSNIAKS.
AND I CAN SAY THEY ARE GREAT
PEOPLE, JUST LIKE OURS.
I LOOK AT THEM BASED ON WHO THEY
ARE, NOT ON THE BASIS OF SOME
STORIES OR MYTHS.
>> Reporter:N TH IE MIDST OF THE
CENSUS NUMBERS RACE, THERE IS A
SMALL BUT VOCAL FOURTH
CONSTITUENCY, LEAD BY ACTIVIST
DARKO BRKAN.
BRKAN AND HIS TEAM ARE TAKING TO
BOSNIA'S STREETS, CALLING FOR
PEOPLE TO DEFY THE THREE MAIND D
ANSWER OTHER, UNDECLARED, EVEN
NONSENSE, ANYTHING BUT
ETHNICITY.
>> ORANGINA BEFORE EVERYTHING,
CITIZEN BEFORE EVERYTHING.
SO DIFFERENT WAYS OF SHOWING
PROTEST AGAINST THE CURRENT
CONSTITUTIONAL MODEL OF THREE
ETHNICITIES AND THEN EVERYBODY
ELSE.
>> Reporter: BRKAN HOPES AS MANY
AS 20% OF BOSNIAN CITIZENS WILL
JOIN HIS PROTEST.
BUT HE ADMITS HE'S FACING AN
UPHILL BATTLE.
>> IF YOU WANT TO RISE ABOVE
ETHNICITY IN BOSNIA THEN USUALLY
YOU'D GET INTO A DISCOURSE THAT
IS ACTUALLY LIKE PROCLAIMING YOU
TO BE EITHER A TRAITOR OR A OR
SOMEBODY WHO IS BREAKING UP THE
COUNTRY.
ON THE OTHER SIDE, PEOPLE ARE
STARTING TO UNDERSTAND WHAT WE
ARE FIGHTING AGAINST HERE AND
ACTUALLY THERE HAS BEEN A LOT OF
MORE EAGER SUPPORT TO US.
>> Reporter: ALMA HAMZA IS
JOINING THE MOVEMENT.
>> HARD CORE.
YEAH, I WANT TO BE HARD CORE.
IT'S THE TYPE OF MUSIC THAT I
REALLY LIKE.
WHAT AM I GOING TO DO WITH
ETHNICITY AT THE END OF THE DAY?
NOTHING.
I NEED A JOB.
>> Reporter: ON OCTOBER 1,
19,000 CENSUS TAKERS INDEED
FANNED OUT ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
BUT ALLEGATIONS OF FRAUD AND
MISHANDLING OF FORMS QUICKLY
EMERGED.
FOR NOW, THE COUNT GOES ON AND
INITIAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS,
ABOUT BOSNIA'S PAINFUL PAST AND
UNCERTAIN FUTURE, ARE EXPECTED
IN JANUARY.
>> Woodruff: KIRA KAY'S STORY IS
PART OF OUR PARTNERSHIP WITH THE
BUREAU FOR INTERNATIONAL
REPORTING AND THEIR SERIES,
"FAULT LINES OF FAITH".
>> Woodruff: NOW BACK TO THE
GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN, ITS EFFECT
ON THE COUNTRY'S GLOBAL
INTERESTS AND THE COST OF NOT
BEING AT THE TABLE.
UNDER SUNNY SKIES IN BALI,
INDONESIA, THIS WEEK, LEADERS OF
ASIAN AND PACIFIC NATIONS HELD
HIGH-LEVEL TALKS AND SIGNED
TRADE DEALS.
WHILE IN WASHINGTON, THE WEATHER
MATCHED THE DISMAL POLITICAL
ATMOSPHERE, AND PRESIDENT OBAMA
STAYED HOME.
>> IN THE SHORT TERM, I WOULD
CHARACTERIZE IT AS MISSED
OPPORTUNITIES.
>> Woodruff: IN A NEWS
CONFERENCE TUESDAY, HE VOICED
FRUSTRATION AT CANCELING HIS
TRIP TO DEAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT
SHUTDOWN AND A LOOMING NATIONAL
DEFAULT.
>> I HAD TO MISS CRITICAL
MEETINGS IN ASIA TO PROMOTE
AMERICAN JOBS AND BUSINESSES.
AND ALTHOUGH AS LONG AS WE GET
THIS FIXED THAT'S NOT LONG-TERM
DAMAGE, WHENEVER WE DO THESE
THINGS, IT HURTS OUR CREDIBILITY
AROUND THE WORLD.
>> Woodruff: OTHER LEADERS IN
BALI WERE SUPPORTIVE, INCLUDING
RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADMIR PUTIN.
>> ( translated ): WE SEE WHAT
IS HAPPENING IN U.S. DOMESTIC
POLITICS AND THIS IS NOT AN EASY
SITUATION.
I THINK THE FACT THAT THE U.S.
PRESIDENT DID NOT COME HERE IS
QUITE JUSTIFIED.
SITUATION, I WOULD NOT COME
EITHER.
>> Woodruff: MR. OBAMA HAD HOPED
TO USE BALI TO ADVANCE HIS PIVOT
TO ASIA, PLACING NEW EMPHASIS ON
THE REGION.
INSTEAD, HIS ABSENCE LEFT
CHINESE PRESIDENT XI NPINJIG
WITH A CLEAR FIELD TO TRY TO
SHORE UP ALLIANCES AND STRIKE
AGREEMENTS WITH NEIGHBORS.
>> ( translated ): A FAMILY OF
HARMONY PROSPERS.
AS A MEMBER OF THE ASIA PACIFIC
FAMILY, CHINA IS READY TO LIVE
IN AMITY WITH OTHER FAMILY
MEMBERS AND HELP EACH OTHER OUT.
WE HOPE ALL MEMBERS OF THE ASIA
>> Woodruff: AT TUESDAY'S NEWS
CONFERENCE, THE PRESIDENT
ACKNOWLEDGED IT'S ADVANTAGE-
CHINA, AT LEAST IN THE SHORT
TERM.
>> I'M SURE THE CHINESE DON'T
MIND THAT I'M NOT THERE RIGHT
NOW, IN THE SENSE THAT, YOU
KNOW, THERE ARE AREAS WHERE WE
HAVE DIFFERENCES AND THEY CAN
PRESENT THEIR POINT OF VIEW AND
NOT GET AS MUCH OF PUSH-BACK AS
IF I WERE THERE.
ALTHOUGH SECRETARY OF STATE
KERRY IS THERE, AND I'M SURE
HE'S DOING A GREAT JOB.
>> Woodruff: KERRY ALSO STOOD IN
FOR THE PRESIDENT AT A SEPARATE
CONFERENCE IN BRUNEI, BUT HE
CANCELED A VISIT TO THE
PHILIPPINES, AS A TROPICAL STORM
APPROACHED.
FOR MORE ON ALL OF THIS WE TURN
TO TWO MEN WITH EXTENSIVE
FOREIGN POLICY EXPERIENCE.
KURT CAMPBELL WAS ASSISTANT
SECRETARY OF STATE FOR EAST
ASIAN AND PACIFIC AFFAIRS DURING
THE FIRST OBAMA ADMINISTRATION.
HE NOW HAS HIS OWN CONSULTING
FIRM.
AND DOUGLAS PAAL SERVED IN THE
REAGAN AND BUSH ADMINISTRATIONS
AT THE STATE DEPARTMENT AND ON
THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
STAFF.
HEOWAL
PEACE.
GENTLEMEN, WELCOME TO THE
NEWSHOUR.
IT'S GOOD TO HAVE YOU.
KURT CAMPBELL, TO YOU FIRST.
HOW BIG A SETBACK IS IT THAT THE
PRESIDENT COULDN'T MAKE THESE
ASIAN MEETINGS?
>> IT'S A BIT OF A SETBACK,
ACTUALLY.
AND I THINK THERE'S SOME DAMAGE.
I THINK GOOD NEWS IS THAT THE
ADMINISTRATION HAS ACKNOWLEDGED
IT, HASN'T PRETENDED LIKE IT
DOESN'T EXIST AND THE KEY IS NOT
SO MUCH NOW, BECAUSE I THINK, AS
YOU HEARD FROM SOME OF THE ASIAN
LEADERS, THEY UNDERSTAND WHY THE
PRESIDENT COULDN'T MAKE IT, BUT
THE QUESTION IS WHAT WILL WE DO
SUBSEQUENTLY?
WE L WE RESCHEDULE THE TRIPS?
WILL WE PUT IN PLACE AN
AMBITIOUS AGENDA?
THINGS THAT WE WANT TO
ACCOMPLISH SUBSEQUENTLY.
AND MORE IMPORTANTLY WILL THIS
CONTINUE TO HAPPEN?
REMEMBER, THESE KINDS OF
CANCELLATIONS AND DOMESTIC
PROBLEMS HAVE PLAGUED US NOW FOR
SEVERAL YEARS AND IT DOES RAISE
SOME QUESTIONS ABOUT WHETHER
COUNTRIES CAN FUNDAMENTALLY
COUNT ON US WHEN THE GOING GETS
TOUGH.
>> Suarez: DOUGLAS PAAL, HOW DO
YOU SEE IT?
HOW MUCH OF A SETBACK?
>> WELL, SYMBOLICALLY THE
CHINESE HAVE PROSPER IT HAD
PRESIDENT SAID IT WELL IN THE
TAKE YOU HAD FROM HIS PRESS
CONFERENCE.
THE SYMBOLIC IMPORTANCE OF THE
UNITED STATES PRESIDENT NOT
BEING SEEN BY THE POPULATIONS
WHO SUPPORT THE LEADERSHIPS WHO
COOPERATE WITH US AND WHO ARE
LOOKING FOR THE U.S. TO BE THERE
AS A COUNTERWEIGHT TO CHINA,
THERE'S SOME EROSION OF SUPPORT
THERE AND THE PRESIDENT CAN MAKE
UP FOR IT WHEN HE GETS BACK OUT
THERE IN TIME AND WORKS ON THE
KINDS OF IDEAS THAT KURT IS
SUGGESTING.
>> Woodruff: WHAT ARE THE SIGNS
OF DAMAGE?
WHAT DO YOU SEE THAT'S -- WHAT'S
ALREADY HAPPENED?
OR WHAT HASN'T HAPPENED THAT
COULD HAVE?
>> IT'S A VERY SUBTLE GAME IN
ASIA.
IT'S A LONG-TERM GAME AS DOUG
SUGGESTS.
LOOK, ALL THE COUNTRIES IN ASIA
WANT THE UNITED STATES THERE.
WE'VE NEVER BEEN MORE POPULAR,
WE'VE NEVER BEEN MORE WELCOME AT
EVERY TABLE I THINK WE ARE IN A
SUBTLE COMPETITION WITH CHINA.
WE'RE BOTH WORKING WITH THEM IN
SOME CIRCUMSTANCES AND OTHER
AREAS WE'RE COMPETING FOR
INFLUENCE.
COUNTRIES WANT TO SEE THEY CAN
RELY ON US THEY'RE BEING
REMINDED ON A REGULAR BASIS THAT
CHINA SAYS WE'RE GOING TO BE
YOUR NEIGHBOR FOR A THOUSAND
YEARS, CAN YOU REALLY COUNT ON
THE UNITED STATES IN CERTAIN
CIRCUMSTANCES?
SO WHEN IT COMES TO THAT
CRITICAL TRADE DEAL AND HARD
DETERMINATIONS ABOUT WHETHER YOU
WANT TO WORK WITH THE UNITED
STATES IN THE SECURITY REALM,
COUNTRIES HAVE TO THINK TWICE.
NOW I AGREE THAT WE CAN RECOVER
FROM THIS BUT WE HAVE TO
RECOGNIZE THAT THESE HAVE AN
ENDURING DWHALT TEND TO EAT AM E
AT SOME OF OUR CREDIBILITY.
>> Woodruff: DOUG PAAL, HOW DOES
THE ADMINISTRATION RECOVERY?
WHAT ARE SOME STEPS THEY CAN
TAKE RIGHT NOW?
>> WELL, RESCHEDULE SOME OF THE
MEETINGS.
WE ALSO HAVE TO PUT A PROGRAM
WITH COOPERATIVE ACTIVITY, MOST
IMPORTANTLY PUSH THE
TERM-SPECIFIC PARTNERSHIP, WHICH
IS A VERY SUBSTANTIAL TRADE
AGREEMENT FOR THIS.
WAITING FOR PRESIDENT TO THE
ARRIVE BEFORE EACH OF THE
LEADERS PUT THE SENSITIVE ISSUES
AND THEY'RE PREPARED TO
COMPROMISE ON ON THE TABLE
TOGETHER WITH US AND OUR
SENSITIVE ISSUES.
THAT'S A BIG THING THAT STILL
WAITS TO BE DONE.
THE.
>> Woodruff: SO IN OTHER WORDS
SOME STEPS HAD BEEN TAKEN IN THE
SO-CALLED ASIA PIVOT THAT THE
PRESIDENT WAS TALKING ABOUT BUT
YOU'RE SAYING THE TIME IS NOW TO
MAKE THESE NEXT MOVES?
IS THAT IT?
>> YEAH, I AGREE WITH THAT.
BUT IT'S GOING TO TAKE NOT JUST
ONE ADMINISTRATION BUT SEVERAL
TO BE ABLE TO UNDERSCORE THAT WE
RECOGNIZE AS A NATION THAT THE
HISTORY OF THE 21st CENTURY IS
GOING TO BE WRITTEN IN ASIA AND
THE PACIFIC REGION AND WE HAVE
TWO ALMOST GRAVITATIONAL PULLS
THAT MAKE THIS DIFFICULT.
ONE IS REALLY TOUGH ENDURING
PROBLEMS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND
SOUTH ASIA THAT REQUIRE AMERICAN
LEADERSHIP AND WE JUST CAN'T
WALK AWAY FROM THOSE.
WE HAVE TO GRADUALLY SHIFT SOME
OF OUR FOCUS.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME THAT THAT'S
TAKING PLACE, WE'VE GOT A
GRAVITATIONAL PULL AT HOME WITH
MORE AND MORE PEOPLE SAYING
LET'S FOCUS MORE OF OUR
ATTENTION AND DOMESTIC PURSUITS
AND OUR OWN POLITICAL DOMESTIC
DYSFUNCTION TAKES US AWAY FROM
THESE REALLY STRESSING
CHALLENGES IN ASIA.
>> Woodruff: DOUG PAAL, HOW DO
OUR OTHER INTERNATIONAL PARTNERS
OR ADVERSARIES, HOW DO THEY SEE
WHAT'S GOING ON IN THE U.S.?
DO THEY UNDERSTAND?
>> THEY UNDERSTAND VERY WELL AT
THE ELITE LEVEL.
THE POPULAR LEVEL NOT QUITE SO
MUCH.
PEOPLE KIND OF WONDER WHY WE'RE
SEEING SO MUCH OF THE CHINESE
AND THE AMERICANS NOT THERE AND
I THINK THAT ERODES THE
CONFIDENCE OF LEADERS TO STICK
WITH WHAT THEY KNOW WHICH IS
WELL THE UNITED STATES HAS GOT
GOOD ECONOMIC FUNDAMENTALS,
DEMOGRAPHICS, SCIENCE, WE'RE
GOING TO BE AROUND FOR A LONG
TIME AND WE HAVE THE WILL TO BE
THERE.
THEY'VE HAD A LITTLE BIT OF THE
SETBACK WITH THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION.
THERE'S A PERCEPTION WIDELY HELD
IN EAST ASIA THAT THE TEAM IS
NOT AS COMMITTED TO THE
REBALANCE TO ASIA AS WAS THE
CASE BEFORE AND THESE THINGS
WITH SYRIA AND ISRAEL AND
EVERYWHERE ELSE HAS COMPOUNDED
IT AND THE PRESIDENT'S OWN
POLICY ON HOW TO DEAL WITH THE
SYRIAN CHEMICAL WEAPONS WHEN HE
WAS TALKING TOUGH, PREPARING TO
ATTACK AND THEN THREW IT TO
CONGRESS TO DECIDE REALLY SENT A
WORRY THROUGH THE REGION AND NOW
THEY SEE CONGRESS AGAIN DRAGGING
THIS BACK INTO THE PRESIDENT'S
OFFICE AND THEY WONDER HOW
ENDURING ARE SFWHEP
>> CAN I JUST -- I AGREE DOUG.
THE OTHER THING IS THAT AMONG
ASIAN ELITES IT'S NO SECRET THAT
TRADITIONALLY THEY FAVOR
REPUBLICANS THEY DO BECAUSE
THINKABLE THEY'RE STABLE ON
NATIONAL SECURITY AND PRO-TRADE
SO THEY HAVE LOOKED HISTORICALLY
TO WHAT YOU MIGHT CALL
EISENHOWER REPUBLICANS AS SORT
OF THE MODEL OF WHAT THEY SEE.
WHEN THEY LOOK AT THE MOW TEST I
CAN AMERICAN POLITICAL CONTEXT
THEY DON'T WORRY ABOUT OUR
POLITICS AND THEY'RE WORRIED
ABOUT IT.
IN ADDITION THESE TRIPS RAISE
HOPES.
JUST TO GIVE YOU AN EXAMPLE THE
LAST VISIT OF A PRESIDENT TO
MALAYSIA, ONE OF OUR TOP TEN
TRADING PARTNER, WAS IN 1967,
WATER BUFFALOS WANDERING THE
STREETS, DIRT STREETS, WHEN
LYNDON JOHNSON WAS THERE THERE
WITH HIS TEN-GALLON HAT.
>> BUT WHEN YOU HAVE THIS KIND
OF DISAGREEMENT, EVEN
DYSFUNCTION GOING ON IN
WASHINGTON CAN AN
ADMINISTRATION, CAN THIS
ADMINISTRATION CHANGE THE
PERCEPTION?
CAN IT GET OTHER COUNTRIES,
OTHER LEADERS TO BE ABLE TO
COUNT ON U.S. LEADERSHIP?
>> WE'VE DONE IT BEFORE.
REMEMBER IN 1997 WE HAD AN
INABILITY OF THE PRESIDENT TO
TRAVEL TO ONE OF THESE MEETINGS,
WE HAD TWO IN THE CLINTON
ADMINISTRATION AND PARTLY
ELECTIONS RESTET TONE FOR
RELATIONS WITH THESE COUNTRIES.
AS I SAY, OUR FUNDAMENTALS ARE
PRETTY GOOD.
OUR PROBLEM IS REALLY THE
GOVERNMENTAL SECTORS, CONGRESS
AND THE ADMINISTRATION WANT TO
GET THEMSELVES ON THE SAME
MESSAGE WHEREAS THE PRIVATE
SECTOR'S DOING WELL, THE
POPULATION IS GROWING, THE
ENERGY PROPS ARE BEING RESOLVED.
>> THERE'S A LOT TO THINK ABOUT
HERE.
IS THE PROBLEMS AS WE'VE BEEN
DISCUSSING ABOUT GOVERNMENT
SHUTDOWN NOT JUST DOMESTICALLY
AFFECT THE WHOLE RLD.WO
KURT CAMPBELL, DOUGLAS PAAL,
THANK YOU BOTH.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT, WE
DISCUSS THE WORK OF THE NEWEST
NOBEL LAUREATE, CANADIAN AUTHOR
ALICE MUNRO.
WIDELY ADMIRED AS A MASTER OF
THE SHORT STORY, MUNRO HAS
PUBLISHED 14 COLLECTIONS, OFTEN
DRAWING INSPIRATION FROM HER
HOME IN RURAL ONTARIO.
AT THE AGE OF 82, MUNRO
ANNOUNCED EARLIER THIS YEAR SHE
WAS RETIRING.
BUT SHE'S ALSO SUGGESTED SHE
WOULD PUT DOWN HER PEN BEFORE
AND THEN CONTINUED TO PUBLISH.
THAT WAS THE CASE BACK IN 2006.
AND IN FACT THAT SUMMER AS SHE
ACCEPTED THE MacDOWELL MEDAL
THAT CELEBRATE THE CREATIVE ARTS
FROM OUR OWN ROBIN MacNEIL, SHE
TALKED OF WHY SHE CHANGED HER
MIND ABOUTETIR RING.
>> I'M NEVER QUITE SATISFIED AND
I'M SOMEHOW ALWAYS RETREATING A
LITTLE BIT.
BECAUSE I THINK I CAN DO MORE
NEXT TIME AND THE THING ABOUT
STOCKING RISING, I SAY IT WITH
PERFECT HONESTY, I BELIEVE IN
IT!
I BELIEVE THAT THERE'S SUCH A
THING AS A NORMAL LIFE.
(LAUGHTER)
AND THAT I AM GOING TO FIND IT
SOMEDAY.
(LAUGHTER)
SO I GOT BUSY THIS SUMMER
READING BOOKS FOR THE GILLER
PRIZE WHICH IS VERY IMPORTANT
LITERARY PRIZE IN CANADA AND I
EVEN BROUGHT A BOOK WITH ME AND
I READ IT WHILE I WAS HERE, THIS
MORNING AFTER BREAKFAST I WENT
UPSTAIRS TO READ SOME MORE OF
THIS BOOK AND SUCH THE AFFECT OF
THIS PLACE THAT I LAY IN BED
READING AND I GOT AN IDEA.
(LAUGHTER)
>> Woodruff: FORTUNATELY, THE
IDEAS KEPT COMING.
JEFFREY BROWN LOOKS AT THE
TOTALITY OF HER CAREER.
>> Brown: FOR THAT, I AM JOINED
BY DEBORAH TREISMAN, FICTION
EDITOR A THE "NEW YORKER"
MAGAZINE.
SHE'S WORKED CLOSELY WITH ALICE
MUNRO FOR THE PAST 12 YEARS.
WELCOME TO YOU, FOR THOSE NOT
FAMILIAR WITH THE WORK OF
MONROE, WHAT CHARACTERIZES IT?
WHAT MAKES IT NOBEL WORTHY?
>>
>> WELL, IT'S JUST THE DEPTH OF
ITS INSIGHT ON HUMAN
RELATIONSHIPS.
ON HOW WE INTERACT WITH EACH
OTHER.
HOW WE FALL IN LOVE.
HOW WE BETRAY EACH OTHER.
ALL SORT OF CARRIED TO US IN
THIS EXQUISITE PERFECT PROSE.
IT'S NOT SHOWY, IT'S NOT
GLOSSING OVER ANYTHING, IT'S
JUST -- IT GOES STRAIGHT TO THE
POINT AND IT GOES STRAIGHT TO
THE HEART OF WHAT WE DO EVERYDAY
OF OUR LIVES.
>> Brown: THE NOBEL COMMITTEE
CITED WHAT ALL LOVERS OF
LITERATURE KNOW, THAT SHE IS THE
MASTER OF CONTEMPORARY SHORT
STORIES.
NOW THE SHORT STORY IS NOT
ALWAYS HONORED.
IT'S OFTEN ADMIRED BUT NOT
HONORED AND SHE'S HELPED CHANGE
THAT, RIGHT?
>> SHE CERTAINLY HAS.
I MEAN, SHE'S PROBABLY ONEF O
TWO OR THREE PEOPLE WHO'VE
REALLY DEDICATED THEIR WRITING
LIVES TO THE SHORT STORY AND THE
ONLY ONE TO REALLY ATTAIN THE
MASTERY THAT SHE HAS.
YOU KNOW, THE THIS AWARD IS NOT
AT ALL MISGUIDED.
IT WAS REALLY TYPED.
-- TIME.
SHE'S BEEN WRITING SO SOLIDLY
AND STEADILY FOR SO LONG AND
EVERY BOOK GETS BETTER.
YOU KNOW, WE HEARD THE CLIP
ABOUT HER GIVING UP WRITING AND
TO ME THAT'S THE BIG
HERE.
>> YOU MEAN SHE SAID SHE REALLY
WILL THIS TIME.
DO YOU BELIEVE HER THIS TIME?
>> I THINK I DO.
SHE'S BEEN CONVINCING.
>> I BROUGHT IN A COPY OF ONE
BOOK OF HERS I HAVE THAT BECAUSE
IT HAS SUCH A WONDERFUL TITLE I
WANTED TO ASK YOU ABOUT THEMES
BUT IT'S THE ONE CALLED HATESHIP
FRIENDSHIP, COURTSHIP, LOVESHIP,
MARRIAGE.
NOW, THAT'S A LOT.
THAT'S A PLAYFUL TITLE BUT IT'S
SOME OF THE THEMES SHE WRITES
ABOUT.
>> THOSE ARE ALL THINGS THAT
COME UP IN HER STORIES.
OTHER THINGS COME UP, TOO.
PARENTHOOD AND DEATH AND AGING,
THE LOSS OF A CHILD THERE ARE
MANY LIFE EVENTS THAT RECUR IN
HER STORIES.
I DON'T THINK THAT SHE WOULD
EVER AGREE TO THE IDEA THAT SHE
IS TRYING TO PORTRAY A
PARTICULAR THEME.
I THINK SHE'S WORKING WITH
CHARACTERS AND I THINK SHE'S
WORKING WITH CHARACTERS THROWN
TOGETHER AND HOW THEY INTERACT
AND MY GUESS IS THAT WHEN SHE
STARTS TO WRITE A STORY, WHEN
SHE GETS AN IDEA SHE'S NOT
SAYING "I'M GOING TO WRITE A
STORY ABOUT COURTSHIP OR
MARRIAGE" SHE'S SAYING "I'M
GOING WRITE A STORY ABOUT THIS
PERSON.
WE'LL SEE WHAT THIS PERSON
DOES."
>> Brown: I WANTED TO ASK YOU
ABOUT THE PERSON BECAUSE IT'S
INTERESTING TO SEE HER IN THAT
CLIP SPEAKING OF McDOWELL.
I KNOW BECAUSE I'VE ASKED TO
INTERVIEW HER FOR THIS PROGRAM
AND BEEN TURNED DOWN BEFORE.
I KNOW SHE DOESN'T LIKE TO TALK
ABOUT HERSELF IN THAT PUBLIC
WAY.
WHAT IS SHE LIKE IN YOUR
INTERACTION?
>> SHE IS A VERY PRIVATE PERSON.
OUR INTERACTION HAS ALWAYS BEEN
JUST WONDERFUL AND I THINK
THAT'S BECAUSE WHEREVER WE
INTERACT WE'RE DEEP IN THE
MIDDLE OF A STORY AND WE'RE
THINKING ABOUT THE STORY AND HOW
TO MAKE IT BETTER AND WHAT GOES
WHERE AND WHICH WORD IS GOING TO
HAVE THE RIGHT AFFECT AND THAT
IS WHAT SHE LOVES TO DO AND
THAT'S WHAT SHE SPENT HER LIFE
DOING.
Su>>arez: WHAT STRIKES YOU
ABOUT HER WORK AS AN EDITOR?
>> AS AN EDITOR WHAT STRIKES ME
IS THE PRECISION OF IT.
IT OFTEN HAPPENS WHILE I'M
WORKING ON OTHAT I THINK SOMETHE
ACROSS A LINE OR A PARAGRAPH
THAT SEEMS SORT OF UNNECESSARY
TO ME OR EXTRANEOUS.
I'LL PUT A LITTLE "X" THROUGH IT
AND I MOVE ON AND I GET ABOUT 20
PAGES LATER AND I SAY "OH, MY
GOODNESS, THAT PARAGRAPH WAS
ABSOLUTELY NEEDED."
THERE'S THIS WONDERFUL CRAFT SHE
HAS.
SHE'S SO -- EVERYTHING FEELS
VERY NATURAL AND EVERYTHING --
THE MOVEMENT OF HER STORIES
FEELS NATURAL.
BUT, IN FACT, IT'S VERY CLEVERLY
HANDLED.
SHE'S GOT IT MAPPED OUT IN HER
MIND.
>> Brown: JUST ABOUT 30 SECONDS
HERE.
IS THERE A BOOK OR A STORY YOU
WANT TO RECOMMEND TO PEOPLE?
>> THERE WAS A STORY FROM 1999
WHICH WE'RE ACTUALLY PREPRINTING
IN THE "NEW YORKER" NEXT WEEK
CALLED "BEAR CAME OVER THE
MOUNTAIN" WHICH IS A STORY ABOUT
A CUP WHERE WILL THE -- WHERE
THE WIFE DEVELOPS ALZEHIMER'S
DISEASE AND IT TURNS INTO A LOVE
STORY OF SORTS.
A VERY TWISTED AND COMPLICATED
SORTS BUT IT'S A FASCINATING
STORY.
>> Brown: I KNOW THAT ONE WELL
AND SITCOMLY KATED BUT VERY
INTERESTING.
DEBRA TRIESMAN OF THE "NEW
YORKER" ON ALICE MUNRO.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE OTHER
MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
HOUSE REPUBLICANS MADE AN OFFER
TO PUSH BACK THE DEBT-LIMIT
DEADLINE WITHOUT ENDING THE
GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN.
WALL STREET SURGED ON HOPES THAT
THE WASHINGTON STALEMATE WILL
END SOON.
THE DOW INDUSTRIALS GAINED MORE
THAN 320 POINTS AND THE PRIME
ONLINE, WE ASKED OUR STUDENT
REPORTING LABS TO HELP US
PREPARE FOR A BIG INTERVIEW
TOMORROW.
WE'RE TALKING TO MALALA
YOUSUFZAI, THE YOUNG WOMAN WHO'S
TAKEN THE WORLD BY STORM BY
STANDING UP FOR EDUCATION.
OUR STUDENT REPORTERS HAVE SENT
IN THEIR QUESTIONS FOR THE 16-
YEAR-OLD, AND THEY RECORDED
PERSONAL MESSAGES FOR HER, ALL
OF WHICH YOU CAN WATCH ON OUR
HOMEPAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
AND THAT'S THE "NEWSHOUR" FOR
TONIGHT.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING WITH MARK
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS AMONG
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS AMONG OTHERS.
OTHERS.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE "PBS
NEWSHOUR," THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.